We thank the referee again for taking the time to read and consider our paper.

We found a small typo in the script to create the plot in Figure 3. It does not affect the results whatsoever; it simply resulted in an erroneous shift in the rate for both the true population and the inferred population, which we have corrected.

> I still believe a demonstration of one case of mis-modeled correlations is relevant in delineating the methods itself. A demonstration of how a 2d population model performs on a 3d correlated population is a necessary communication to the readers.

We disagree that the additional suggested runs are a necessary test of PixelPop. We hope our responses below are sufficient to justify this point of view, but we are happy to clarify further if necessary. However, in order to address the curiosity of the referee, we have provided results on the additional runs suggested in the attached pdf.

We do not believe that the additional runs suggested are necessary to "delineate the methods itself". Applying a population model that only accounts for a subset of correlations when it is known that higher-dimensional correlations are present is a concern for every single gravitational-wave population analysis published to date. This is because (as the referee correctly identifies) it is very unlikely that all binary black-hole source parameters are uncorrelated at the population level. However, this is the assumption of all analyses due to the difficulty in modeling higher-dimensional distributions. Neglecting such correlations can, in general, produce biased results - it is simply an example of model misspecification - and this does not depend on the model used. This would really be a test of assumptions that are not specific to PixelPop and are just as relevant for standard parametric models - even more so, in fact, since they are much less flexible in the lower-dimensional correlations allowed.

To make the paper clearer about this point, we have added an additional comment on the issue of neglecting higher-dimensional correlations to the conclusions (highlighted in red, page 14).

On the other hand, we do definitely agree that a study quantitatively assessing the impact of these assumptions would be very useful for the community as a whole. Unfortunately, a correct investigation into model misspecification would constitute one or probably several detailed papers (wherein PixelPop need not even appear) and is therefore beyond the scope of the present manuscript. That being said, if the referee can point out text in the current draft where we seem to imply PixelPop would not be biased by neglected higher-dimensional correlations, we would be happy to review such statements.


> The paper already demonstrates the analysis of several simulated populations with various correlations, so I do not see why adding one more simulated analysis to demonstrate the performance of the method in a context that could be a very crucial limitation of the methodology, would “further complicate” the paper.

Designing astrophysical population models with higher-dimensional correlations is intrinsically difficult, and such models tend to be overly simplistic and overly constraining. If it were not so, robust multidimensional population fits would already be standard in the literature - but the community is far from this situation. Astrophysical predictions (e.g., from rapid population synthesis) do produce such populations, and it is specifically these astrophysically motivated populations that we are targeting in followup work. However, the focus of this paper is on the method, not on astrophysical interpretation.

We disagree that it is a "very crucial limitation of the methodology" - it is a limitation of all population models and analyses in the literature. PixelPop can go beyond two dimensions, the main difficulty being increased computational cost (due to the curse of dimensionality). There is already discussion in the current draft of potential adaptations to the model for increased efficiency in higher dimensions, but making those adaptations is again beyond the scope of the two-dimensional focus here.


> Hence I would still like to see at least one more simulated analysis added to the paper, namely the first one from my original suggestion:

> “Simulate a population wherein chi_eff is correlated with both mass ratio and redshift. Analyze with PixelPoP’s chi_eff-z and chi_eff-q models. In each case assume that the parameters that are not binned are uncorrelated with the ones that are binned.”

> Since the correlations in the recommended population have actually been found in data by other works, How PixelPop fairs against such a population is a necessary demonstration of the methods presented.

It is not obvious that performing the test that is being suggested will lead to any firm answer. The reason is that every result one finds will depend on exactly the correlation that was simulated to start with. It is also not obvious that performing the suggested test and showing how PixelPop fares with a true 3D correlation (or rather with *a specific* 3D correlation) would teach us anything about how it would do with any other specific 3D correlation or even an N>3 correlation.

However, in an attempt to at least partially address this concern, we ran an analysis in which the catalog of detections contains a 50% mixture of events from one subpopulation in which mass ratio and effective spin are correlated and a second in which redshift and effective spin are correlated. In particular, the mixture is from the two correlated catalogs presented in Section 4 (and Table 1). Overall, this means the intrinsic distribution is correlated in three dimensions when viewed as a single population (as PixelPop does) instead of two subpopulations. We ran two analyses, as suggested: one that assumes that mass ratio and effective spin are correlated but neglects correlations with redshift, and the second where only effective spin and redshift are allowed to be correlated.

For the first case, the inferred comoving rate density is shown in Fig. 1 of the attached PDF. We show the slice at a redshift z=0.2 in the left panel and the slice at redshift z=1 in the right-hand panel. Figure 2 shows the inferred Spearman correlation, which recovers the correct value of the correlation coefficient for the redshift fixed to z=0.2 and again for the redshift fixed at z=1. The second case is shown in Fig. 3 in the attached PDF. We show the inferred comoving rate density and the true rate at a fixed mass ratio q=1 and the same for a fixed mass ratio q=0.6. Figure 4 shows the inferred Spearman broadening coefficient, which again recovers the correct value within posterior uncertainty.

These tests show how two-dimensional PixelPop fares against one specific population with a three dimensional correlation. For this population, PixelPop allows for the correct two-dimensional marginal correlations within its (rather large) error bars when there are 400 detections in the catalog. For a stronger three dimensional correlation, biases could be more prominent. A study on the impact of model misspecification would have to look at a variety of underlying populations with different correlations and show how different assumptions in the population model lead to different levels of bias in the inference, dependent on the number of observed events.

For the reasons above and because we believe these tests distract from the main purpose of the paper (to introduce the PixelPop model and show how it fares against some exemplary populations with two dimensional correlations), we have not included them in the updated manuscript.