----------------------------------------------------------------------
Report of Referee A -- LU19707/Heinzel
----------------------------------------------------------------------

This manuscript focuses on inferring the population properties of
binary black holes~(BBHs) using the non-parametric population model
PixelPop, the details of which are summarized by the authors in an
accompanying methods paper submitted to PRD. The method involves
pixelating the 2d subspace of specific BBH parameters into
high-resolution bins and inferring the merger rate density in each bin
from GW data using a conditional autoregressive prior. Free of the
strong assumptions that parametric population models rely on, the
authors can constrain features in the joint distribution of pairwise
BBH parameters while being driven by the data instead of a priori
considerations regarding BBH formation channels. The paper is well
written and the main results are presented in a manner accessible to a
broad audience.

While the method itself is novel and has several advantages and a few
disadvantages relative to existing non-parametric population inference
methodologies, I have a major concern regarding whether or not the
current set of results based on GWTC-3 data “substantially advances
fundamental or applied physical science”, which I elaborate below.

The method used to obtain the results is novel, innovative, and boasts
significantly higher flexibility in reconstructing the 2d distribution
of specific pairs of BBH parameters, than similar existing methods.
However, the results themselves do not constitute something
substantially new to the field of BBH formation and populations that
was not already known before.

The primary results presented in the Letter are:

1) A non-parametric constraint on the joint population distribution of
BBH primary mass and redshift. “Within posterior uncertainty”, the
authors find no evidence of mass-redshift correlation in the BBH
population using GWTC-3 data (Fig. 1), which is consistent with the
findings of existing non-parametric and semi-parametric explorations
of the same (such as https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.08046, and
https://arxiv.org/pdf/2111.13991). Hence these results, while
interesting as validation studies of existing ones, do not represent
new astrophysical findings.

2) A non-parametric constraint on the joint population distribution of
BBH asymmetric mass ratio and effective inspiral spin. The authors
find that the merger rate decreases at smaller mass ratio and higher
effective spin values indicating the existence of a population-level
anti-correlation between effective spin and mass ratio (Fig. 2). This
is consistent with the findings of existing parametric and
semi-parametric studies (eg https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.15278,
https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.00993). While this result serves as
validation of existing results using a highly flexible population
model, they do not represent new findings in the field.

3) A non-parametric constraint on the joint population distribution of
BBH redshifts and effective inspiral spins. The authors find that the
effective spin distribution broadens with redshift. This is consistent
with the findings of existing parametric and semi-parametric studies
(eg https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.01578,
https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.00993). The authors also find hints of a
new aspect of this spin redshift correlation in which the median
merger rate at lower redshifts is higher for effective spin = 0 than
at effective spin=0.25 . However the authors themselves note that this
feature can be non-existent up to posterior uncertainty. Again, these
results validate the findings of existing analyses on the same dataset
but do not contain anything substantially new.

4) For the mass-redshift analysis, the authors also demonstrate that
the inference of such correlations are “fundamentally limited by the
detector horizon”. This is an interesting point to note in GW-based
population inference but again, does not constitute a new
astrophysical result.

To summarize, the non-parametric constraints on the population
properties of BBHs presented in this Letter corroborate the findings
of existing parametric and non-parametric studies and do not represent
new astrophysical results. The high flexibility of the method makes
these results interesting validations of past findings and hence
suitable for submission to other physical review journals such as
Physical Review D, APJ or lower yet significantly high-impact Letter
format journals such as MNRAS Letters. However, I do not believe the
results are novel/impactful enough to the field of BBH populations and
formations for a Physical Review Letters communication.
