----------------------------------------------------------------------
Second Report of the Referee -- DU13758/Heinzel
----------------------------------------------------------------------

The authors have addressed all of my minor concerns/ comments. However as for my
primary concern, the authors, while acknowledging the necessity of the
recommended demonstrations intend to carry it out as a follow-up work.
Specifically, they mention:

“The referee has made excellent suggestions for follow-up work and we have
already started exploring exactly those suggestions. In particular, we are
applying the PixelPop model to populations in which correlations exist in three
or four dimensions, investigating the impact of assuming only lower-dimensional
correlations and the resulting biased inference. In particular, we are targeting
correlations between primary mass, mass ratio, redshift, and effective spin,
just as the referee suggests. We prefer leaving this to a followup paper as this
submission to PRD is primarily focused on describing the method / model and
applying it to a first test case -- which already has resulted in a long and
technical paper which we do not want to complicate further!”

I disagree with parts of this statement. While the full systematics study that
the authors bring up is indeed suitable for follow-up work, I still believe a
demonstration of one case of mis-modeled correlations is relevant in delineating
the methods itself. A demonstration of how a 2d population model performs on a
3d correlated population is a necessary communication to the readers.

The paper already demonstrates the analysis of several simulated populations
with various correlations, so I do not see why adding one more simulated
analysis to demonstrate the performance of the method in a context that could be
a very crucial limitation of the methodology, would “further complicate” the
paper.

Hence I would still like to see at least one more simulated analysis added to
the paper, namely the first one from my original suggestion:

“Simulate a population wherein chi_eff is correlated with both mass ratio and
redshift. Analyze with PixelPoP’s chi_eff-z and chi_eff-q models. In each case
assume that the parameters that are not binned are uncorrelated with the ones
that are binned.”

Since the correlations in the recommended population have actually been found in
data by other works, How PixelPop fairs against such a population is a necessary
demonstration of the methods presented.